# Attaining Peak performance

## Summary

This document will summarize the book "Peak, Secrets From the new Science of Expertise." The purpose of such a summary is for our faculty members to each attain an understanding of the ground-level principles that enable peak performance so that they may use such knowledge to develop an effective teaching style that focuses on enabling students to attain mastery. Each instructor, like each coder, has natural strengths and weaknesses and therefore must tweak the general guidelines herein presented to match their own preferred approach.

## Chapter 1: Introducing practice

For a long time throughout history, we have known about this ability of a "perfect pitch." About one in 10,000 people have the ability to accurately recognize the pitch of any note that is played in a musical instrument. You can blindfold these people and then hit a random key on the piano and they will tell you exactly which musical note it was.

Ever since we found out about the skill of perfect pitch we have thought it to be some kind of innate gift that only a few people were born with, and that you had to get training in music during early childhood to develop it. Thus, we considered perfect pitch to be a product of genetic gifts in addition to early childhood musical training (ages 2-6). That was until some Japanese dude named Sakakibara grabbed that notion by the pussy. This guy ran a study with a bunch of kids ages 2 to 6 and got every single one of them to develop perfect pitch. He did this by following a very well structured practice routine of progressvie difficulty. He started with only a few notes and hammered sound recognition exercises until all those notes were mastered, then move on to more notes, etc., until the kids had mastered perfect pitch.

The training was about 3-5 sessions per day of very short duration, not every day of the week. It took some kids 10 months to develop perfect pitch, and other kids a year and a half, but everyone got it. **Over a year and a half all these kids had perfect pitch. Reflecting on this a little bit and bringing it back to Motzart's experience, we can see Motzart practiced more in one month during his early childhood than the entirety of the time it took these kids to develop perfect pitch.**

This is a very salient point. With the right instruction at the right time, there is essentially no limit to talent.

Another salient point in these first two chapters is that will is not enough. It doesn't matter how badly you want to be the best basketball player in the world, if you're 5'5 and all you do is play 1 on 1's against Lebron James, you will never improve. You must have the right sort of practice, where you follow a structured, methodical plan to overcome your own specific weaknesses. This type of comprehensive practicing methodology has been dubbed **deliberate practice**. (The practice terminology in this document may not be consistent with the terminology in pedagogy.md but the ideas are consistent).

There's a stretch of the book where the author goes through a series of jaw dropping examples of skill attainment. In 1908, some dude smashed the world record for a full marathon at around 2 hours 55 minutes. Experts thought he was nearing the limit of human performance potential. Today, that time would have barely qualified him for the Boston marathon.

In the 1908 olympics, some dude busted himself up trying a double sommersault dive. The press reacted by saying the jump was too dangerous and that it should be banned from the olympics. Today, this dive is within the skill level of thousands of ten-year-olds, and a quadruple sommersault isn't even that difficult of a dive.

In 1920 there was a famous classical virtuoso musician who was recorded playing Chopin and was lauded for his incredible mastery at the time. Today, his recordings are used as examples of how NOT to play Chopin and how to identify sloppiness.

Some fucking dude even memorized 70 thousand digits of pi. It took him over 24 hours just to recite them.

All of this has happened due to the sophistication of training technique and the average amount of practice elite level people undertake nowadays.

There are several types of practice characterized by the mindset of the person practicing and their effectiveness.

The first and most basic type of practice, **naive practice**, is basically when we get some instruction on something (from a teacher, youtube, etc.) and then practice a little bit until the activity becomes second nature. This is how we learn driving, for instance, and how many of us learned sports in elementary school. Practice dribbling, throwing, or catching until it becomes automatic. However, it is a demonstrated fact that once an activity becomes automatic, its mindless repetition leads to no further gains in skill. In fact, when an activity is only repeated automatically, skil decays over time.

It therefore follows that the common assumption that a Doctor, teacher, driver, or runner with 15 years of experience is better than one who has 4 years of experience. Statistically, this is highly unlikely to be the case. In most cases, both the 15 year and the 4 year doctor are practicing mindlessly and therefore no longer attaining skill. The 15 year doctor has had a longer time span for some of his less frequently used skills to decay, so one should expect that he would be worse at his job than a newer Doctor.

The way to avoid this progressive decay in ability is by engaging in **purposeful practice** with a high enough degree of frequency.

What characterizes **purposeful practice** is having a specific goal. Think of a tennis player who can't ever hit a ball if it comes at his chest area. If all this guy does is just play tennis games, he will never improve. EVEN if his playing isn't mindless, he just won't have enough repetition and opportunities to work on his weakness. If instead he asks someone to just fire 100 shots at his chest every day for 2 weeks he is much more likely likely to overcome his weakness and improve his skill.

The notion of the 10,000 hours to mastery is a myth. If a teenage piano student learns enough to play a few songs, but then spends 20 years playing the same songs in the same way at Nordstrom he will never improve. In fact, he will slowly get worse over time.

With all that said, the answer isn't always to try harder and be more mindful, but usually the answer is to have a plan. For instance, there was an anecdote of a music student who wanted to play a specific piece of a violin song at the same speed as played by Itzhak Perlman. She had been trying for weeks to do it and not getting anywhere, her fingers would just get tied up and cramp up. She went to her music teacher for advice, and the music teacher grabbed a metronome and measured the speed of the piece as played by Perlman. She then set the metronome to a slow pace that was well within the student's skill level. The student played the song, and then the teacher slightly increased the metronome and had the student play it again. They repeated this process several times until the teacher showed the metronome setting to the student and it was faster than Perlman's pace. the point here is you can't just ram your head against the wall of a problem you can't solve. And this is essentially what colleges ask CS majors to do for the first 2 years of studying.

Another example of this type of thinking at work was shown through the anecdote of a student undergoing a memory skill development experiment. The student, Steve, was practicing the memorization of digits every day, as a part of an experiment with the book's Author (this experiment is alluded to multiple times). At one point, Steve was stuck with 20 numbers and didn't seem to be able to memorize any more. So the researcher threw him a curve ball and asked him to memorize 30 numbers. Although the student failed, he was able to memorize 24, effectively breaking that mental plateau. Some plateaus are mental, others are skill-based. As instructors we must help our students break through by helping them identify which kind of plateau they are stuck on.

Breaking through plateaus by engaging in purposeful practice is hard work. It requires consistent positive feedback. This is why it is imperative that our classes are always fun.

In summary, purposeful practice can be characterized by:  
* The student must leave his comfort zone  
* The student must be focused, invest much mental energy, and have clear goals  
* The student must have a plan for reaching those goals (that's our job)  
* The student must have a way to monitor progress (that's our jobs, and the huge importance of tests and timely feedback)
* The student must be able to maintain motivation  

### Limits of Purposeful practice

Going back to the digit memorization experiment with Steve, there was another girl who was recruited to this experiment. Although she quickly improved in the beginning, her progress stalled at around 20 numbers for so long that she gave up. Upon analyzing the mental maps and mnemonics that she formed for the purposes of memorization, researchers found that they were all random. She used times of the day and stuff like that. Conversely, Steve, who was able to improve to 82 numbers, used patterns and numbers already in his long term memory. For instance, if he hear the number 907, he would think of that as "a pretty good 2 mile time," rather than something he didn't already have a mental schema for, such as "9:07 am." If he heard the number 400 he would instantly think of "the mythical 4 minute mile."

There was another guy besides Steve and this girl who also joined the experiment. With this guy, Steve was recruited as a coach to train him. This resulted in very quick improvements at first but then the guy stalled at around 30 digits. It was not until he figure out ways to tweak and adapt Steve's techniques that he continued to improve, eventually reaching 100 digits and surpassing his teacher Steve.

When practicing towards the improvement of cognitive tasks, the goal should be to develop mental structures that make it possible to work around the limitations of short term memory and deal with large amounts of information at once. There are many ways to do this and their effectiveness varies from person to person. Invariable, however, one must adapt the methods to ones own circumstances.

Purposeful practice therefore doesn't tell the whole story. One of the elements that's missing from purposeful practice is what separates it from deliberate practice, which is the subject of the next portion of the book.


## Chapter 2: the adaptations to practice

This chapter starts by telling the reader about London and how complicated navigating this city is. It's such an old city it has no structure or grid system. London cab drivers have to be extremely good at navigating, and in fact you're not allowed to become a cabbie in London unless you can pass some ridiculously difficult test where they ask you stuff like "How do you get from place x to the place that has a 1-foot-tall statue of a mouse with cheese?" Therefore, it requires much special mental ability for spatial reasoning and memory to be a cab driver in London. They've researched the brains of London cab drivers and the evidence is extremely strong that London cab drivers start out as normal people but all the navigation training and memorization they do increases the size of their hippocampus in order to enable them to have extraordinary navigation skills.

The limits of what the brain and body can do are oftentimes underestimated. Most really fit people can do 50 to 100 pushups, so one might think that the world record is 1,000 or 1,500. In reality, the world record for nonstop pushups is over 10,500. Same goes for pullups, some dude has done a few thousand even though most people can't do one and fit people usually do 10-15.

Blind people present interesting example of the bridge between physical and brain adaptations. They've studied braille instructors to find that their fingers are incredibly sensitive to touch. They can register a touch pressure so light it's almost non existent and normal people would never even come close to sensing it. However, normal people can easily differentiate when different fingers are touched. It's easy for us to identify when we are feeling pressure in our index finger vs our ring finger. However, these braille masters lose this ability. It turns out that the neural networks they use for feeling touch on their fingers grow so much to the point they overlap, and they lose the ability to differentiate between fingers. **This is a key point. By striving for success in one thing, we sacrifice other abilities.** Indeed, even those London cab drivers have been observed to lose the ability to memorize certain kinds of things to the point that their ability in this area is very much under average. In order to be able to memorize all these streets, landmarks, and navigation patterns they sacrifice the ability to memorize 2-dimensional shapes.

Another super interesting example of the unanticipated power of neuroplasticity is an experiment where scientists gathered a bunch of middle aged people with presbyopia and had them do some kind of visual exercises for 30mins 3x a week. After 3 months, the subjects who previously couldn't see anything up close were able to read without glasses. This happened because they better trained their brain to see contrast and apply "software fixes." Their actual eye hardware didn't change.

Bodily adaptations are pretty well understood. The gist of it is that in order to elicit adaptation you must push your body past its limit for a certain duration of time. A muscle doesn't grow from lifting 3lb pink dumbells and you will never become able to run a marathon by running 100 yards a day. The mechanisms by which this actually happens are prety well understood at the cellular level - ATP depletion, micro-tears of muscle fibers, a bunch of stuff like that.

Neurological adaptations are not as well understood but it seems like the principles are the same. You must push past your comfort zone in order to create neural adaptations. What we do know about the physiology of neuroplasticity is that new neurons don't really pop up. What happens is neural network connections are form, and the brain can also increase the amount of myelin it has. Myelin is a protein that surrounds many nerve fibers which increases the speed at which they can communicate.

So, the greater the challenge the greater the neural changes we can elicit, up to a point. Of course if we push ourselves too much we risk burnout. We have scientifically observed physiological brain adaptations in many fields, including the following:

* Pilots have a certain region of the brain more developed than normal people  
* String musicians have larger cerebellums and the brain circuits that control their left hand fingers are much bigger than normal  
* Mathematicians have a specific area of the brain where their cerebral cortex is thicker  
* Divers have a thicker cerebral cortex in an area of the brain associated with body-spatial awareness.

Some important bulletpoints about cerebral adaptation:  
* Younger brains are more adaptable. By starting training in something at a young age what you are essentially doing is like re-directing the branch of a sapling. You can push it over 1mm and significantly alter the shape of the grown tree. With a grown tree, if you push one of its branches even one whole meter, you may not achieve the same effect.  
* As you develop mastery in something you **will** regress in another area. As I become an increasingly devoted coder I have noted it takes significant mental effort for me to even catch a fast-moving ball.  
* The neural changes you elicit through practice of a mental discipline require upkeep. They studied retired London cab drivers and found that their hippocampi were significantly shrunken compared to active cab drivers. However, they were still more developed than those of people who were never cab drivers.

Most people live in the area of "good enough." They learn a little bit about some job, enough to not get fired, and stay at that skill level forever. This is largely due to laziness but also to a lack of growth mindset, where people think talent is fixed and once their skill level naturally plateaus, there's little they can do about it. Purposeful and deliberate practice are instruments we can use in order to *increase our talent* at particular pursuits. What characterizes deliberate practice is the subject of the next few chapters.

## Chapter 3: Mental Representations

This chapter starts out talking about blindfolded chess and what it can teach us about purposeful practice. One lesson I took, which wasn't really stated in the book, was that our individual practice regimes yield some "side effects." Alexander Alekhine is a widely regarded top 10 chess players of all time and the best blindfolded chess player, and he got there by practicing and practicing. Yet, he never actually practiced blindfolded chess. Instead, he just practiced in his mind's eye, while at school or doing other things. This was what lead him to be so good at blindfolded chess. Thus, the techniques you become good at using will have different positive (and sometimes negative) side effects, such as developing related abilities to a lesser or greater degree.

They did an investigation where a chess master, mid level player and novice were tested at memorizing chess boards. When the board positions were taken from actual games, the master memorized 2/3rds of the pieces, the beginner player memorized 4 pieces, and the intermediate player was somewhere in between. But if the board positions were scattered randomly, all three participants remembered 2-3. Thus, the reason why the chess master was able to remember more pieces was not because of superior memory but because of superior mental representations of each sub-formation. We can see this same phenomenon in a more day-to-day context. Try memorizing a scattered sentence vs a correct sentence:

"The woman stood in line to buy peanuts for her son"

vs

"son woman buy the her stood peanuts for line in to"

Chess players have a chess positional memory reliant on understanding the "grammar" of chess, just like we have a word memorization capacity reliant on understanding the grammar of natural language.

When it comes to mastering chess, the amount of time spent in analysis and study of games played by masters is the biggest predictor of skill, not actual games played vs others. It usually takes 10 years to reach Grand Master, but only if you invest enough time into study as opposed to just playing.

Masters have 50,000 complex mental representations. Grand masters visualize "lines of force" and "power" instead of pieces. These vague representations have the requirement that they be vague enough to look at the whole board as a forest but precise enough to be able to zero in on the trees. In addition, this is a key thing that enables good chess. If you are able to look at a board and immediately and intuitively see something like "lines of power," then it becomes much easier to move a couple of pieces in your mind and see the lines of power in the new configuration. This is not something that beginners can do. In order to really "see" two plays ahead, a beginner would need to visualize the next play, then consider all possible moves (hundreds), then select a few moves from the subset of good moves, and then try a few of them. In other words, the beginner would have to go through the exercise of creating the "lines of power" voluntarily, which is really really difficult although in theory not impossible. Here's where it gets impossible... Given the lines of power after move 1, now do it again for moves 2, 3, 4... Impossible. To a master, however, the lines of power just jump out at them and the mere act of imagining a move and the new board configuration results in a clear visual of viable moves and what the next one might be.

Mental representations are not just for chess masters. We all use them. **A mental representation is mental structure that corresponds to an object, an idea, a collection of information, or anything else concrete or abstract that the brain is thinking about. It exists in long term memory and can be used to respond effectively to situations involving the subject of the mental representation** Mental representations can include information, facts, images, rules, relationships, and so on. An example of a mental representation: "the Mona Lisa" has a mental representation. People will have varying degrees of complexity to the mental representations. For instance someone might recall the Mona Lisa's hairstyle, eyebrows, where she's sitting. To me, she's a yellow girl in dark clothing.

Another example: dog. Suppose you've never seen a dog because you live in some place with no joy. Then the concept of dog is just a collection of facts: "furry, 4 legs, can be trained"... etc. At this point you may miss the fact that a Chihuahua and a Great Dane are both dogs. But as you actually become able to see dogs then you learn their real nature. Some experts' mental representation of dogs even allow them to predict what dogs will do in different situations.

**Chunks.** One term that is commonly used when talking about memory, learning, and skill development is "chunking" or "memory chunks." Chunks are, essentially, complex mental representations. In other words, a "chunk" is a mental representation of a concept that itself is the aggregation of several other smaller concepts and the relationship between them. Thus, if your mental representation of a "dog" is that of a baby - something along the lines of weird living thing that has hair and doesn't talk - you may even think that a monkey or a cat is a dog (as babies often do). At some point, a mental representation becomes robust enough and involves enough other mental representations to qualify as a chunk, though it is evidently impossible to quantify when a simple mental representation becomes a chunk.

**The core component of improving skill at anything is improving mental representations.**

Mental representations are very domain specific - chess mental representations wont help in other games or with general memory. This is a crucial fact about expert performance: You don't train your memory, you train your memory for strings of digits, or collections of words, or chess boards. You don't train to be an athlete, you train to be a diver or a ball player. You don't train to become a doctor, you train to become a diagnostician, pathologist, or neurosurgeon. When people do become athletes in a number of sports or skilled in a number of areas they do so by training in a number of areas.

**Expert performance is characterized by quality and quantity of mental representations.** This is what explains the difference between novices and experts.

Batting works that way. By looking at the ball leaving the pitcher's hand, batters have a very good idea of what the pitch will be, and this is due to mental representations.

So what is it that changes in the brain due to deliberate practice? Neural circuitry. Through the process of practice, those who reach expert level do so simply because they have changed their neural circuitry to produce highly specialized mental representations, which in turn produces what seems like incredible ability for memory, problem solving and pattern recognition.

In order to understand this fully, we need to develop a good mental representation of the concept of mental representation. And as was the case with "dog," the best way to develop an understanding of mental representations is to see tons of examples and get to know them. One of the things I find useful is to try to notice how my own mental representations sometimes let me down. Margin of a nested div is a good example.

Soccer positions are just like chess positions. They did an experiment where they showed video of soccer matches to various groups of people, and they stopped the video when a player received a pass and asked the groups to predict what the player was going to do. Good players were much better at predicting the next move than bad players or spectators, and they were also better able to recall the positions of all the other players.

Rock climbers have mental representations too. It was found that expert rock climbers create mental representations for rock climbing holds based on the grips that they require, and they categorize holds this way as well. In addition, when they're getting ready to climb, rock climbers brains automatically retrieve those mental representations when looking at those holds, and their brains automatically send signals to their hands to ready them for the required grip. Novice climbers are much slower and have to do this all consciously.

We are all experts at reading, thanks to mental representations. We all started off painstakingly sounding out each individual letter.

The degree to which we can extract meaning from what we read, however, that's a different story. They've done studies that show that when you read some kind of specialized content, for instance an article about football or baseball, the strongest determinant of retention is not iq/verbal ability but instead how much you already know about the sport. Your pre existing mental representations enable you to better extract meaning. If you know nothing about the sport, then extracting meaning from the article is like trying to memorize random words. But if you know the sport, then the words are no longer random and they make up a sentence. This is why it is impossible to have truly unbiased reading and comprehension tests - there will always be those kids who have more pre-existing knowledge (and more diverse mental representations) pertaining to the material that they are reading.

A recent study examined knowledge about multiline insurance. The best salesmen knew more about each product, but more importantly, they had more complex and integrated knowledge (mental representations) about each product and who it was good for. The better agents had a ton more "if-then" structures.

The act of writing has mental representations too. More novice writers have an idea and a body of reinforcing/complementary thoughts to go with it, and they loosely categorize these by relevance or topic. This approach to knowledge is called "knowledge telling." Expert writers do it differently. First they consider what they want to accomplish with the thing they are writing; in other words they start by focusing on the thoughts they want to spur on their readers.  Advanced writers use an iterative process to develop a progressively more detailed mental representation of the thing they're going to write. They create an outline but the mental representation is richer than an outline. They know why each piece of the outline is there, what it's supposed to accomplish, and why they chose the order they chose. Usually, expert writers have the mental representation of the book change multiple times before it accomplishes the goals that they want it to accomplish. For instance, the first draft of this book (Peak) contained little emphasis on mental representations. But as the writers went on and presented their ideas, they noted that they weren't accomplishing their goals and they had the aha! moment where they realized that in order to understand deliberate practice you need to understand that what it's supposed to accomplish is the enrichment of mental representations. And in order to understand this, you needed to understand mental representations. So they kept on rewriting until they accomplished their goal, engaging in a type of writing known as knowledge transforming.

This is in general what leads to the development of expertise, you engage in your activity (in this case writing), observe whether you accomplished the outcomes you wanted, and if not then you need to find a way to evolve your mental representation in such a way that you can try again and see if you accomplish your goal.

Mental representations also are the main differentiator between the best musicians and the rest. Experts have much richer and more detailed mental representations of the musical pieces they play, allowing them to more easily give themselves feedback. Beginners only have rough outlines of the pieces, so they can tell when they hit a wrong note but they need the help of an instructor in order to tell when they've made a more subtle mistake such as timing. There is a catch 22 here... The better your mental representations, the more productive your practice can be, because you more easily pick up on your own errors and are able to adjust mental representations accordingly. Here we can note the nested div margin example once again... If you are stumped by some nonsensical css behavior and cant figure out why it happens, the best you can do to alter your mental representation is "well, use padding more often than margin, i guess."

They did a study on children who were learning instruments. They measured the mistakes the students made during the first and second play-throughs while practicing. The worst students made more mistakes but also repeated a very high percentage of them (50%+) the second time they played the piece. The best students made significantly fewer mistakes (11 vs 1.4) and repeated only 20% of them. The conclusion was that the differences in the rate of skill development laid in how well students were able to detect their own mistakes - ie how good their mental representations of the music were.

Beginner musicians have mental representations of the notes and rhythm, while more advanced musicians also consider things like volume, pitch, vibrato, relative volume, how the notes interplay with the other instruments, etc.

Honing the skill improves mental representation and an improved mental representation helps hone the skill. You work up to a big skill bit by bit, slowly improving mental representation so you can get closer to it. The less "gifted" you are in quickly developing accurate mental representations, the more coaching you will need if you want to actually improve.

## Chapter 4: Deliberate Practice

Violinists and ballet dancers have shown that there is a huge correlation between hours spent practicing and skill attained. The Violinists study that Erickson did was the one that is often misquoted by people as it relates to the "10,000 hour rule." 10k hours was the amount of practice that the students had amassed BEFORE starting their higher ed studies in violin. Mastery is completely dependent on how well-established the field is. In a centuries-old field like music, the number is more around the realm of 30k-40k hours.

"It is safe to conclude based on multiple studies that nobody develops extraordinary abilities without putting in tremendous amounts of practice."

Many fields have had the skill levels of elite performers advance tremendously over time. These advances have a very strong correspondence to advancements in teaching techniques. In the more advanced fields such as music, it is widely regarded to be impossible to attain elite performance without *expert coaching*. Let's recall that purposeful practice refers to the ability of trying hard and pushing past your comfort zone when practicing something. What separates deliberate practice from purposeful practice is the fact that the activity in question has expert teachers, expert performers, and established teaching methods. Specifically, what separates deliberate practice from purposeful practice are two main things:  

  1. It requires a field that is already reasonable well developed. That is, a field where expert performers have attained a level of performance that clearly sets them apart from those who entered the field relatively recently. Anything where there is no direct competition does not qualify as a candidate for deliberate practice - for instance knowledge workers, teaching, management, consultant, etc.
  2. Deliberate practice requires an expert teacher who can assign and plan specific practice activities designed to help a student improve his or her performance. Obviously, before this can be possible, there must be certain established teaching techniques and also there must be actual experts in the field.

Deliberate practice is purposeful practice that knows where it's going and how to get there. Deliberate practice takes place just outside the student's comfort zone. However one point of contention where my personal opinion deviates from that of Dr. Erickson is this "comfort zone" issue. First, one can train one's ability to feel comfort just outside one's comfort zone. Second, one can establish routines and incentive structures to make getting outside your comfort zone more comfortable. For instance, I as an extrovert become very much energized by teaching. Every time I teach, I live code whatever I teach and I've managed to not only feel comfortable with the effort but also I've learned how to harness the pressure of performing in the moment as a positive stressor to push me to higher performance. How I did this: easing into it. When I first started teaching I prepared the fuck out of every lesson, now I improvise everything and only prepare the high-level idea for WHAT I'm gonna build in class. Thus, this effort **can** be enjoyable.

Deliberate practice aims at a specific, measurable, simple goal, not at any kind of faint overall goal such as "just getting better".

Deliberate practice, like purposeful practice, requires very high focus and mental energy.

Deliberate practice also requires quick feedback. The more advanced you are, the more of this feedback can come from you because your mental representations are much better. In the beginning, not having expert feedback will slow you way down.

It should be evident from this description that deliberate practice is not a possibility in every field. The main things that will disqualify a field from being one where people can engage in deliberate practice are as follows:  
  1. Fields where no expert performers exist.
  2. Fields where no expert trainers (or well established training methodologies of proven effectiveness) exist.

Many fields of human endeavor are such that expert performers *cannot* exist. This is usually the case due to high subjectivity or slow or non-existent feedback mechanisms. For instance, they've done probably 5 bajillion studies trying to find ways or contexts in which expert fund managers might beat the market performance. It has failed every single time - stock picking has feedback that is too slow, difficult to interpret, and too cumbersome to organize in your mind. Stock picking is an activity one simply cannot improve at because one cannot get effective feedback. Another such example is psychotherapy - the book *House of Cards* shows how psychologists were not better at providing therapy than laypeople with minimal training. My favorite example of this provided in the book is Wine Tasters - because I always assumed that wine tasting actually did have something to it. But they did an experiment where they gave wine judges repeated samples of the same wine and they were inconsistent in their ratings of the same exact wine. This shows that a lot of their ability is simply not real. If one wants to get better at a practice such as these, this task is not possible without creating an artificial mechanism for training. At the time of this writing, I cannot think of how one might structure a practice regime for stock picking or psychotherapy. In my opinion, such practices are best abandoned by anyone who seeks the thrill of involving themselves in the process of attaining true expertise. However, for wine tasting, it would seem simple. All you'd have to do is do blind tests until you can hone your palate enough that you can tell when you're tasting a wine you've already tasted before. You could do exercises where you test batches of 10 wines and are asked which 2-3 are the same, or exercises where you are asked to taste 10 wines and tell which one has x or y ingredient. It's reasonable to think that immediate feedback would lead to improvement.

Other fields of human endeavor just don't have expert teachers yet. Training methods are constantly evolving, and sometimes the most god-awful sets of practices are what makes it into the mainstream. Bodybuilding is a very good example of this, with athletes engaging in borderline-mystical practices such as weighted stretches and stomach vacuums thinking that these practices create results in spite of all evidence to the contrary. But at least in these fields, you do have very clearly distinguishable top performers. So, even though there's all sorts of mysticism and bs that makes it into their training methods, at least it's a place to start. In fields such as these, you will be able to look at many top performers and start to find patterns and commonalities that exist across them.

Whenever, possible, however, if a field qualifies for deliberate practice, one should start out that way. Self-teaching usually leads to bad habits which you will have to waste time on reversing later. Get a coach to help you get started, if you can.

A word of warning on the 10,000 hour rule: it's bullshit. You can be a top performer in a given field in under 1,000 just by being the first one to get competitive about it (eg. digit memorization a few years ago), or it can take 30,000+ hours to be a top level performer in well-established fields like classical music. There is also no real evidence to suggest that *anyone* who engages in x hours of practice will attain at least y level of performance.

## Chapter 5: Practice on the job

This chapter starts by giving an account of the methods and results that characterized the Top Gun school of US Navy pilots. Before the Navy started the program, their fighters were shooting down 2 plates per each one they lost. After one year of this training, US navy pilots got to the point where the ratio of us planes shot down was 1 per each 10 Vietnamese planes. Later on in the gulf war, the us forces had an outcome of 33 to 1 in air battles, perhaps the most dominant performance in combat aviation history.

It's a little fuzzy to me whether the Top Gun training fully qualifies as deliberate practice or not, but it certainly gets close. And the fact that it provided such astounding improvements in spite of being somewhat improvised is a good indicator of the effectiveness and return on investment that you can get if you spend time thinking about your practice rather than only thinking about your skill.

It turns out that once you've survived about 10 dog fights, you are almost certain to win the next one. The skill level difference between these seasoned pilots and a first timer is huge. The top gun training program capitalized on this, bringing the pilots who had had the most dog fight wins as trainers. The trainees would then do gun-less dog fights against these more seasoned vets, but everything else besides the absence of guns was real. After the fact, the trainers would grill the trainees and even show them footage of the fights, forcing the trainees to reflect and learn from their mistakes.

A few decades ago, they did a study on mammogram radiologists and found that they essentially did not get better with time, and that the only thing that seemed to affect how accurate a radiologist was, was the quality of his/her initial training. Dr. Erickson devised a thought experiment of how radiologists might improve their skills: he suggested creating a library of thousands of mammogram images where the patient's outcome was known (ie. an image from a year or more ago such that you know if the patient is still healthy or if cancer developed). This library would allow radiologists to attempt a reading and immediately get feedback. In australia, they did create such a library of images and have seen immense skill improvements in the radiologists that use it.

They've done dozens of studies on doctors and the effectiveness on continuing ed. **Lectures are worthless for continuing ed.** The only kind of continuing ed that has any effect is the kind that has an interactive component. For instance, having doctors attend rounds, participate in simulations, role play, discussion groups, hands on training, etc. The key thing missing is the understanding that **the development of skill is separate from knowledge - ie knowledge is not skill.** Furthermore, even in those kinds of training that were effective, the effect was very small. Why? I think it seems obvious that this would be the case... it's like taking one coding lesson every 3-6 months. How slow would your improvement be without consistent practice designed to address your own skill shortcomings?

This insight - that skill requires many hours of practice in order to improve - is key even for our own professional development. Reading hacker news or watching jsconf is easy, deliberate coding practice is not. We all need to make an effort to code more and bullshit around youtube less. Just like doctors were found to not get better from attending lectures, so too we cannot get better from reading about coding. Indeed, the only way that doctors get better is when they are able to get immediate feedback. For surgeons in particular, this is built into their practice. For instance, there's immediate indicators of things going wrong, such as a ruptured blood vessel or damaged tissue. In addition, there's post-op reviews and post-op care. After a cancer tumor surgery, for instance, there's a biopsy done to analyze the removed tissue and ensure that the cancerous tissue is surrounded by a minimal girth of healthy tissue. If it's not, then the doctor right away knows they made a mistake. Also, there might be post-op complications that give the doctor feedback on what they might have done wrong. Indeed, in a study done on prostate cancer surgeries, it was discovered that all these feedback mechanisms result in doctors improving their skill (as measured by a 5-year cancer recurrence rate) all the way until they had accumulated 2500 surgeries. At this point, the doctors were essentially perfect at preventing recurrence on simple prostate cancer cases. It's flabbergasting that we aren't investing in ways to create simulations such that our doctors can accumulate those 2500 surgeries before having to both someone's live surgery due to inexperience.

In contrast, non-surgeon doctors do not have any mechanisms such as these. Dr. Erickson suggests that the way that doctors could/should approach their continuing improvement is by identifying top performers and having them shadow and offer individualized feedback to more beginner doctors.

To recap: **it is well established by research that non-interactive continuing ed such as lectures and seminars do little or nothing to improve doctors' skill.** Furthermore, there is no reason to believe other professions are different. We cannot learn much of anything, especially programming, from lecture. **Doing is the only way.**

In coding, we have some similar mechanisms to what surgeons have, such as the program either works or it doesn't. However, the difference between a journeyman programmer and a master/artisan programmer is *how* the code is written and organized. Master programmers write concise, maintainable code with low cyclomatic complexity, small functions, and low interdependence. For a master programmer, it's very easy to change database engines or fit a new requirement in. It's extremely difficult to achieve this without feedback from someone who's better than we are. Ideally in the world of programming we could have people like Fred George, Martin Fowler and prag Dave review our code and help us suck less.

The boom in Lamparoscopic surgery offers one of the biggest examples of people in general making the mistake of ignoring skill in favor of knowledge. When this kind of surgery first came out, it was assumed that experienced surgeons just needed a quick demo in order to pick it up and use it. However, when researchers compared the learning curves of experienced surgeons vs doctors fresh out of med school in performing lamparoscopic surgery, they found out the hard way that this wasn't the case. Experienced surgeons learned this new technique no faster than new surgeons; they created the same number of patient complications. Since these findings, they have developed much better methods for teaching this surgery. Before doctors can perform lamparoscopic surgery, they have to undergo training with an expert lamparoscopic surgeon and pass practical tests on the subject. They are even shown explicit techniques such as how to push tissues aside to gain better visibility.

Most professions emphasize knowledge over skill because knowledge telling is much easier and cheaper than helping students develop skill. Indeed, in spite of the overwhelming amount of evidence and complaints from students who enter the workforce and don't have any practical skills, academia insists on teaching by way of knowledge-telling and testing because their whole model would crumble if they acknowledged the shortcomings of this approach.

**Accumulating experience does not lead to increased skill.** Therefore, any training program should focus on helping people increase their skills rather than give them knowledge. Training should focus on doing rather than on knowing, because repeatedly practicing the skill under slightly different circumstances will enrich the trainee's **mental representations** in a way that a lecture is simply not capable of doing.
